---
layout: post
title: Bookie: The Gospel According to Matthew, Chapter 1:1-17
---

# What's the go

So I've decided on a feature for this blog: a regular series through the gospels,
taken one or two chapters a week. This will be the start of a general trend of
book reviews or "Bookies." So I will start in a natural place: the gospel of Matthew.

Author disclaimer: This is the once-off "all about me" statement that I'd rather
get out into the open and out of the way so the story of scripture might have a
chance of speaking for itself.

I am a Christian. I grew up in a "literalist" pentecostal evangelical strand,
though over time I have shifted away from that quite a bit. I don't identify myself
by any particular doctrinal commitments. Many evangelicals would consider me a
liberal, and I am in some important ways, though I am definitely **not** a theological
liberal in the technical sense (in that I affirm the divinity, humanity and bodily
resurrection of Christ). If you must pigeon-hole me I like to read people like
N.T. Wright, Peter Enns, Brian McLaren and Rob Bell, though I don't agree with
everything any of them have to say.

I do not have a degree in theology or Bible studies, or ancient near eastern literature
and interpretation, or... so take what I have to say with an even larger grain
of salt than usual. On this ground I am a thorough amateur. I do not claim to lay
down absolute truth or the single "best" interpretation, or to get all the details
of the original context correct and in its proper place. I try my best to be open
to correction, and to argue gracefully and in good faith, though I am thoroughly human.
The Bible itself makes no pretence of journalistic objectivity about its content,
and neither do I. I write as a Christian (and not even a particularly good one). So there.

My actual degree is in physics, and my doctoral project is in particle physics
and cosmology. So I have a somewhat unusual background for a Biblical interpreter.
(Though I'm not alone: John Polkinghorne has done scholarly work in particle physics
and theology. His critical realist epistemology is very appealing to me, *so far
as I understand it*, though I would classify myself as a Bayesian. I don't even
know if these are distinct categories.) I will not shoehorn everything into an
unnatural "concordist" framework any more than I will argue for young Earth creationism.
Both extremes are false. Instead I try to understand Genesis as creation literature
in an ancient near east context. We'll see if any of this is remotely relevant to
a gospel series. I should think probably not.

Add to that author list a wonderful book I've recently discovered by Carl Madearis
and you pretty much have me down. I would much prefer to drop every other label and
just say "I'm a guy trying to follow Jesus" and leave it there. Jesus is the heart
and soul of the gospel - its foundation and highest pinnacle, its corner stone,
its full breadth and deepest truth, its broadest outline and its microscopic focus.
I get that there is a point to theology, doctrine and apologetics. I don't reject
them outright. But this blog series is, for me, a way of paring down. Returning to
"simply Jesus" by reading the stories about him. My sincere hope is that some
measure of Him may speak through this author and medium.

----

# The Gospel According to Matthew, Chapter 1:1-17

> An account of the genealogy of Jesus the Messiah, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
>
> Abraham was the father of Isaac, and Isaac the father of Jacob,
> and Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers, and Judah the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar,
> and Perez the father of Hezron, and Hezron the father of Aram, and Aram the father of Aminadab,
> and Aminadab the father of Nahshon, and Nahshon the father of Salmon,
> and Salmon the father of Boaz by Rahab, and Boaz the father of Obed by Ruth,
> and Obed the father of Jesse, and Jesse the father of King David.
[Matt 1:1-6 NRSV](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=233019563)

"An account of ... Jesus the Messiah..." there is no pretence or detachment here. This
book is making a statement. It is coming straight out and saying the big words
"Jesus the Messiah," a magnificently loaded term to use just after Jerusalem has been
sacked and several would be Messiahs and their followers brutally murdered by the Romans.
This isn't religion. It's life and death.

According to the nice [_How to Read the Bible Book by Book_](http://zondervan.com/9780310211181),
by Fee and Stuart, Matthew was probably written in the 70s or 80s A.D., after the
destruction of the Jewish temple by the Romans. This was a fractured time for Israel,
with several messianic revolts culminating in the catastrophic destruction of Israel's
[most sacred institution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siege_of_Jerusalem_%2870%29)
by the Romans and the scattering of Jews around the world. Shortly after this we
get the gospel of an apparently dead - that is, failed - Messiah from far enough
before that several other movements had sprung up and been cut down in the meantime.
This failed Messiah's movement had continued after his death in a most unusual way -
its followers did not pick any successor (Jesus had brothers so the opportunity was there),
nor did they disperse and disappear. Instead they claimed that Jesus was very much
alive indeed and that he truly was the rightful king, not just of Israel, but of
the world. This is the message Matthew is going to try and get across.

And after this we jump straight into nonsense, at least to westernised ears.
The genealogy continues after this, counting forty one generations in all.
For an "application" readers a list of names is a complete waste of time. Why is
it even in the Bible if it is "meant to apply to us today?" But wait, there's more:
Matthew explicitly points out that this is three groups of fourteen, although Jechoniah
must be counted twice for this to work out. Those looking for numerology and secret
meanings would surely be driven mad by this. What gives? Who cares about a genealogy?

It should be pretty clear by now. Jesus is a Jewish king. To convince a Jew that
someone is the rightful Jewish king one needs credentials. Matthew fills his
gospel with "this was to fulfill... the prophets." We westerners tend to get this
wrong. This is not about ticking off a prophetic checklist. Those "calculations"
people sometimes throw around about how unlikely it is that someone would fulfill
the whole prophecy checklist by chance (and what gets put on the list is invariably
arbitrary) are so absurd and counter-contextual that they make my little physicist
brain melt.

No. What's going on here is Matthew, who draws heavily from Mark but *adds in* a Jewish
genealogy, is placing Jesus squarely within the Jewish hope of God's ultimate redemption
of Israel. The names speak to first century Jews in a way that they could never speak
to modern readers. It is clear already that if this Jesus *is* Messiah, his Messiahship
must look very different from the rest of the would-bes, the have-beens,
the have-been-murdered-by-the-Romans. The rest of the book shows true Messiahship.
It is about revising the old hopes, to show how the true Messiah fulfills better hopes,
and fulfills them more than any earthly king could have.

To show that the true successor to the throne is a crucified servant.

Matthew has a big task ahead.