---
layout: post
title: "Bookie: The Gospel According to Matthew, Chapter 2:13-23"
excerpt:
  _Now after they had left, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream and said,
  \'Get up, take the child and his mother, and flee to Egypt, and remain there until I tell you...\'_
---

> Now after they had left, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream and said,
> "Get up, take the child and his mother, and flee to Egypt, and remain there until
> I tell you; for Herod is about to search for the child, to destroy him."
> Then Joseph got up, took the child and his mother by night, and went to Egypt,
> and remained there until the death of Herod. This was to fulfil what had been
> spoken by the Lord through the prophet, "Out of Egypt I have called my son."
>
> When Herod saw that he had been tricked by the wise men, he was infuriated,
> and he sent and killed all the children in and around Bethlehem who were two
> years old or under, according to the time that he had learned from the wise men.
> Then was fulfilled what had been spoken through the prophet Jeremiah:
>
> "A voice was heard in Ramah,
>   wailing and loud lamentation,
> Rachel weeping for her children;
>   she refused to be consoled, because they are no more."
>
> When Herod died, an angel of the Lord suddenly appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt and said,
> "Get up, take the child and his mother, and go to the land of Israel,
> for those who were seeking the child's life are dead." Then Joseph got up,
> took the child and his mother, and went to the land of Israel. But when he heard
> that Archelaus was ruling over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there.
> And after being warned in a dream, he went away to the district of Galilee.
> There he made his home in a town called Nazareth, so that what had been spoken
> through the prophets might be fulfilled, "He will be called a Nazorean."

[Matt. 2:13-23](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=235450758)

(*It has been a little longer than I hoped since my last entry. But late is better
than never!*)

The Christmas story is set in a world that, though in many ways very different,
is also very similar to the world of today. Then as now it is expected that rulers
will inflict mass violence on their subjects at the slightest provocation. With all
the advancements of modern democratic governments it has been easy for those
comfortable in the west to forget how volatile the *wide world* can be. But then
suddenly some news item will inject itself into your comfortable routine: genocides,
civil wars, tin pot dictators flexing their muscles on their own people, even -
a recent discovery for me - involuntary live organ harvesting. What hope have we got?

Jesus was born into the centre of a power struggle in a world of power struggles.
The magi - foreign scholars of some description - travel large distances into Israeli
terroritory to proclaim some unheard of kid from a tiny town of poor shepherds the
rightful king. This to a king barely deserving of the title - really no more than
a petty thug who happened to be convenient for the higher powers - subservient to
a distant but all-powerful dictator. The ruler in Rome was the first emperor - Augustus,
who was the first roman to declare himself a god. He initiated the imperial cult,
and sent messengers across the empire to spread the "gospel" - the news that god
walks among men and will bring peace and justice at last. (The original meaning
of the word "gospel" refers to the news of imperial succession.)

The emperor and his local thugs achieved this peace, of sorts, through violence. King
Herod the Great, in particular, was known for violent outbursts, made no better by
delusions of grandeur and probably some kind of paranoia complex (there are speculative
diagnoses of disease, but it is hard to say what really drove the man, especially
in his latter insanity years). For example, from his deathbed he ordered that the
leading citizens of Jericho be slaughtered so that people would be weeping at his
funeral (c.f. Wright, *Matthew for Everyone*). The rest of his family was little better,
so when Joseph found out who was in charge after dad died he was afraid, and moved
to a northern district away from the seat of power.

This is not too unlike the scenes we are all familiar with today. Yet, in the midst
of all this, Jesus comes. The presence of God himself as a fragile baby, subject
to the whims and dangers of this world, fully surrendered to the *conditionalness*
of it all. We are to see here, in that even in the darkest of circumstances,
Jesus fulfills the hope of God's presence. Even while an illegitimate king defiles
the throne, we see a repeat of the story of Israel - exile and exodus, fulfilled
in Jesus.

This is how the Lord appears in our distress - in a most unusual way. He does not
overpower the forces of darkness and subject them to his will by brute force.
Instead he lowers himself, subjecting himself to our same suffering, accepting the
injustice of it, and so changing the meaning of the story. Instead of breaking the
back of evil, evil exhausts itself on him. It becomes its own undoing. And when
evil is spent, all of its fury poured out on the willing victim, one finds in
Jesus still hope, love, peace, mercy, compassion, forgiveness, justice, faith*fulness*.
When all hatreds are exhausted nothing is left standing but the core of love indestructible.

This is our hope.
