---
layout: post
title: "Bookie: The Gospel According to Matthew, Chapter 3:1-17"
excerpt: _In those days John the Baptist appeared in the wilderness of Judea, proclaiming,
 'Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.'_ 
---

> In those days John the Baptist appeared in the wilderness of Judea, proclaiming,
> 'Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.' This is the one of whom the
> prophet Isaiah spoke when he said,
>
> 'The voice of one crying out in the wilderness:
>  "Prepare the way of the Lord,
>   make his paths straight."'
>
> Now John wore clothing of camel's hair with a leather belt around his waist,
> and his food was locusts and wild honey. Then the people of Jerusalem and all
> Judea were going out to him, and all the region along the Jordan, and they were
> baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.
>
> But when he saw many Pharisees and Sadducees coming for baptism, he said to them,
> 'You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bear fruit
> worthy of repentance. Do not presume to say to yourselves, "We have Abraham as
> our ancestor"; for I tell you, God is able from these stones to raise up
> children to Abraham. Even now the axe is lying at the root of the trees;
> every tree therefore that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.
>
> "I baptize you with water for repentance, but one who is more powerful than I
> is coming after me; I am not worthy to carry his sandals. He will baptize you
> with the Holy Spirit and fire. His winnowing-fork is in his hand, and he will
> clear his threshing-floor and will gather his wheat into the granary; but the
> chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.'
[Matt. 3:1-12 NRSV](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=236099665)

> Then Jesus came from Galilee to John at the Jordan, to be baptized by him.
> John would have prevented him, saying, 'I need to be baptized by you, and do
> you come to me?' But Jesus answered him, 'Let it be so now; for it is proper
> for us in this way to fulfil all righteousness.' Then he consented.
> And when Jesus had been baptized, just as he came up from the water,
> suddenly the heavens were opened to him and he saw the Spirit of God
> descending like a dove and alighting on him. And a voice from heaven said,
> 'This is my Son, the Beloved, with whom I am well pleased.'
[Matt. 3:13-17 NRSV](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=236099773)

*Why* is the voice from heaven well pleased? Is it just because this is Jesus
and Jesus is great? Yaay! Let's get together the cheer squad! No. It's not quite
like that. Jesus *did something here*, something *deserving* of praise from heaven.
It's amazing how often you can read something over and over, so that it is familiar
to you like an old friend, and still miss the obvious. And how sometimes it takes
the voice of another person to open your eyes to the plain meaning. (Thanks, Tom Wright.)

This happens, you see, when you grow up in a tradition that prooftexts passages
to support doctrines, rather than reads them as part of a larger *story* with an
unfolding arc and character development. Everytime I was exposed to this passage
growing up it was used to support trinitarian theology and the divinity of Jesus.
"See, this verse clearly says that Jesus is the Son of God, and that the same Spirit
of God was on Jesus..." and on it goes. Now that's all well and good, but if anything
it is a minor subtext to the actual passage we have before us. The central focus
here isn't the voice from heaven or whether it's trinitarian, but what does Jesus *do*?

John seems to have some idea that Jesus is the one he has been talking about,
the one who will baptize with the Holy Spirit and with fire, who will wield his
winnowing fork and burn up the chaff of our misdeeds. He must be wondering when
it is going to happen. After all, he probably saw much of Jesus growing up. Have
you ever felt this way about one of your relatives? Jesus' answer seems to be,
"It's happening now, but even you, the greatest prophet, cannot imagine how I'm
going to do it."

Jesus submits himself to baptism. **Baptism** - the shameful repentance of confessed
sinners, the symbolic passage through the river Jordan from exile to the promised land,
symbolic of the death and rebirth that must pass between the exile of sin to the new
life in God's presence. (All too often we heaven seekers forget about the rebirth.
*Absent from the body, present with the Lord* is one thing, but resurrection works
itself in there somewhere and is, in fact, the point.) We go down into the water
and come back up. But Jesus, God's own *Immanuel* presence with us, **went down into
the water**.

John knew he wasn't qualified for this. In fact, it didn't make any sense. But Jesus
seems to say "this is how it's got to be, this is how God's redemption of Israel
is going to look - God himself taking the form of a repentant sinner." *This* is
why Jesus is blessed. He *chose* here, not to take the kingly road, riding on a 
valiant steed and driving back the enemy before his mighty army. Jesus *chose* to
be the suffering servant he saw and the Psalms and the prophets. He chose to take
the pain of others on himself. He chose to be their death for them, so they might
have reprieve. *This* is why he was blessed. *This* is why the Spirit of God,
a dove of peace - not the sword of war or the fire of judgement, descends upon Jesus.
It may only descend upon such a one, one for whom judgement itself is judged.

We tend not to think of Jesus changing or growing very much. After all, Jesus is
God and God is perfect and perfect means unchanging (does it though?). But another
tradition, less Greek but more Hebrew, an older tradition, has Jesus the man grow
up and *earn* God's favour by surrendering, even to death on the cross, and so
becoming the Son of God and rightful king. This view has a lot of scriptural support,
but I find it uncomfortable as a cautious westerner, and don't know how far to take it.
But I like it. I like it because it makes Jesus a human - a real true fleshy human,
not just a human skin hiding a superman. In this passage we see Jesus go into the
water, surrounded by broken, penitential sinners. He seems to say "I'm with you. Here.
Now. Not as a judge, but as the judged. This is God with you. Follow me."
