---
layout: post
title: "Bookie: The Gospel According to Matthew, Chapter 1:18-2:12"
excerpt: _Now the birth of Jesus the Messiah took place in this way._ 
---

> Now the birth of Jesus the Messiah took place in this way. When his mother Mary
> had been engaged to Joseph, but before they lived together, she was found to be
> with child from the Holy Spirit. Her husband Joseph, being a righteous man and
> unwilling to expose her to public disgrace, planned to dismiss her quietly.
> But just when he had resolved to do this, an angel of the Lord appeared to him
> in a dream and said, 'Joseph, son of David, do not be afraid to take Mary as your wife,
> for the child conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit. She will bear a son,
> and you are to name him Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.'
> All this took place to fulfil what had been spoken by the Lord through the prophet:
>
> 'Look, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
>   and they shall name him Emmanuel',
> which means, 'God is with us.'
>
> When Joseph awoke from sleep, he did as the angel of the Lord commanded him;
> he took her as his wife, but had no marital relations with her until she had borne a son;
> and he named him Jesus.
[Matt. 1:18-25 NRSV](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=233678922)

So context, context, context. Matthew adds a birth account which is completely
missing from his shared source with Mark, but doesn't have all the familiar
Christmas-y details we are used to from Luke. I have seen so many amateur productions
of this story that it is hard to get certain pictures out of your head and read
the story as if its the first time. I have so many wrong ideas about the Christmas
story - like the timing and number of the magi (they were something like two years
late to the birth), and that Jesus was born in a barn rather than [Joseph's family
home](https://www.biblearchaeology.org/post/2008/11/08/The-Manger-and-the-Inn.aspx) (the greek word translated *inn*, \\(\kappa\alpha\tau\acute{\alpha}\lambda\upsilon\mu\alpha\\)
*kat-al-oo-mah*, is translated *guest room* everywhere else it is used. Only in
the Christmas story did the mistranslation stick. And it would have been a terrible
breach of hospitality - anathema - for Joseph's family to put them out in the cold *for weeks*).

Anyway, rant over. Matthew doesn't have the angelic proclamation telling Mary about
the divine conception about to take place. It only has Joseph surprised at discovering
that his fiance is pregnant. It says he was a righteous man. What does this mean?
He didn't want to disgrace her. Here is the legal precedent:

> Suppose a man marries a woman, but after going in to her, he dislikes her and
> makes up charges against her, slandering her by saying, 'I married this woman;
> but when I lay with her, I did not find evidence of her virginity.' The father of
> the young woman and her mother shall then submit the evidence of the young woman's
> virginity to the elders of the city at the gate. The father of the young woman shall
> say to the elders: 'I gave my daughter in marriage to this man but he dislikes her;
> now he has made up charges against her, saying, "I did not find evidence of your
> daughter's virginity." But here is the evidence of my daughter's virginity.'
> Then they shall spread out the cloth before the elders of the town. The elders
> of that town shall take the man and punish him; they shall fine him one hundred
> shekels of silver (which they shall give to the young woman's father) because he
> has slandered a virgin of Israel. She shall remain his wife; he shall not be permitted
> to divorce her as long as he lives.
>
> If, however, this charge is true, that evidence of the young woman's virginity was not found,
> then **they shall bring the young woman out to the entrance of her father's house and the
> men of her town shall stone her to death, because she committed a disgraceful act in
> Israel by prostituting herself in her father's house**. So you shall purge the evil from your midst.
>
> If a man is caught lying with the wife of another man, both of them shall die,
> the man who lay with the woman as well as the woman. So you shall purge the evil from Israel. 
>
> If there is a young woman, a virgin already engaged to be married, and a man meets
> her in the town and lies with her, you shall bring both of them to the gate of that
> town and stone them to death, the young woman because she did not cry for help in the
> town and the man because he violated his neighbour's wife. So you shall purge the evil
> from your midst.
>
> But if the man meets the engaged woman in the open country, and the man seizes her and
> lies with her, then only the man who lay with her shall die. You shall do nothing to the
> young woman; the young woman has not committed an offence punishable by death, because
> this case is like that of someone who attacks and murders a neighbour. Since he found
> her in the open country, the engaged woman may have cried for help, but there was
> no one to rescue her.
>
> If a man meets a virgin who is not engaged, and seizes her and lies with her,
> and they are caught in the act, the man who lay with her shall give fifty shekels
> of silver to the young woman's father, and she shall become his wife. Because he violated
> her he shall not be permitted to divorce her as long as he lives. 
[Deut. 22:13-29 NRSV](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=233682373)

See that because the father is not around (because there *is no* father), there are no
good endings for Mary. The rape statues can't apply here, so there is no out for her.
The marriage contract has already been broken (remember that in this culture marriage
is a *contract* between *families*, not a thing of romantic love), there is no one
around to pay the bride price except for Joseph, and the child isn't his.

His options seem to be:

1. Marry her and disown the child. Mary and the child die in shame.
2. Claim that Mary was raped "in the open country" and break off the engagement.
Mary and the child get to live without shame in her father's house, but Joseph avoids
the responsibilities he would have to them - responsibilities he didn't sign up for
when the engagement was arranged.
3. Adopt the child as his own. This wipes the books clean for Mary, but Joseph
takes on the responsibility of fathering a child that isn't his, including the
possible drama associated with passing on the birthright to someone who isn't
a blood relative. Would the blood children of Joseph have standing to make a claim
when the time comes? I don't know.

I really don't know how this would have worked out in practice, but it's quite a stick.
Add to this the communal dimension - the fact that there was very little privacy in
a small Galilean village and everybody probably knew what was going on.

But an angel of the Lord appears to Joseph in a dream telling him not to be afraid
to take Mary as his wife. So just as Mary was chosen to be the mother, Joseph was
chosen to be the father. Joseph did as the Lord commanded and took Mary as his wife,
adopting Jesus as his own son.

Skip forward nine months and Jesus is born in Bethlehem. No census, no journey, just
a fast cut and they are in a different place. Ok. We get the magi here, who are not
mentioned in Luke (neither in fact are the slaughtering of the innocents or the
journey to Egypt - all of theses are prophecy fulfillments, high on Matthew's agenda,
but not apparently Luke's). There isn't the festive singing or the shepherds seeing
angels on the hills as in Luke's gospel. Matthew is very matter of fact:
"Jesus was born in Bethlehem in Judea, during the reign of King Herod."

It seems important to him to establish quickly the Jewishness of Jesus, and the
fulfillment of the messianic types. Straight away some foreign leaders appear,
asking the king "Where is the newborn king of the Jews? We saw his star as it rose,
and we have come to worhsip him."

Herod was deeply disturbed, "as was everyone in Jerusalem." I am not surprised.
First off, the Jews are forbidden from practicing astrology. So of course they
miss the signs. Yet these wisened foreigners come in announcing a new jewish king
on the basis of their astrological readings! It's clear that God is doing something
new and **big**. He is moving heaven and Earth, and his own people, steeped in
messianic hopes as they are, are oblivious to it. It has a clear ring of kingliness
about it. And new kings don't like old kings.

> When King Herod heard this, he was frightened, and all Jerusalem with him;
> and calling together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired
> of them where the Messiah was to be born. They told him, 'In Bethlehem of Judea;
> for so it has been written by the prophet:
>
> And you, Bethlehem, in the land of Judah,
>   are by no means least among the rulers of Judah;
> for from you shall come a ruler
>   who is to shepherd my people Israel.'
>
> Then Herod secretly called for the wise men and learned from them the exact time
> when the star had appeared. Then he sent them to Bethlehem, saying, 'Go and search
> diligently for the child; and when you have found him, bring me word so that I may
> also go and pay him homage.'
> 
> When they had heard the king, they set out; and there, ahead of them, went the star
> that they had seen at its rising, until it stopped over the place where the child was.
> When they saw that the star had stopped, they were overwhelmed with joy. On entering the house,
> they saw the child with Mary his mother; and they knelt down and paid him homage.
> Then, opening their treasure-chests, they offered him gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
> And having been warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they left for their own country by another road.
[Matt. 2:3-12 NRSV](http://bible.oremus.org/?ql=233685431)

The journey from Jerusalem to Bethlehem probably didn't take long. I wonder if they
spent the night in Bethlehem. What would that have been like? A house full of royal
astrologers, fresh off the trail from distant lands, paying homage to a small boy
from a backwater and calling him king. Is this where Jesus began to feel a sense of
vocation?

In other news I'm going to start reading Tom Wright's [*Matthew for Everyone*](http://www.amazon.com/dp/B0079LJ1BW/ref=pe_245070_24466410_M1T1DP)
before the next installment. Should be some good insights. I'll share what I come
across. :-)
